**What You Should Know Before Joining an Employee Wellness Program**

By Ashley Moss | June 18, 2021

![](image_1.jpg)

Weigh-in time at NBC’s The Office

In 2019 more than 80% of large employers offered a [workplace wellness
program](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323538785_Health_and_Big_Data_An_Ethical_Framework_for_Health_Information_Collection_by_Corporate_Wellness_Programs)
as healthcare trends in America turn toward disease prevention. Some
wellness programs focus on behavioral changes like smoking cessation,
weight loss, or stress management. Participants might complete a health
survey or undergo biometric tests in a lab. Many employers offer big
financial incentives for participating and/or reaching target biometric
values. While on the surface this may seem like a win-win for employers
and employees, this article takes a closer look at the potential
downsides of privacy compromise, unfairness, and questionable
effectiveness.

Laws and regulations that normally protect your health data [may not
apply](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/workplace-wellness/index.html)
to your workplace wellness program. The federal government’s HIPAA laws
cover doctor’s offices and insurance companies who use healthcare data.
These laws limit information sharing to protect your privacy and require
security measures to ensure the safety of electronic health information.

If a workplace wellness program is offered through an insurance plan,
HIPAA applies. However, if it is offered directly through the employer,
HIPAA does not apply. This means the program is not legally required to
follow HIPAA’s anti-hacking standards. It also means employee health
data can be sold or shared without legal repercussions. Experts warn
that an employer with direct access to health data could use it to
discriminate against, or even lay off, those with a high cost of care.

Although these programs claim to be voluntary, employers provide a
financial incentive averaging hundreds of dollars. It’s unclear how much
pressure this places on each employee, especially because the dollar
penalty a person can afford really depends on their financial situation.
There is some concern that employers have a hidden agenda: Wellness
programs shift the burden of medical costs away from the employer and
toward unhealthy or non-participating employees.

Wellness programs may be unfair to certain groups of people. [Research
shows](https://www.kff.org/private-insurance/issue-brief/trends-in-workplace-wellness-programs-and-evolving-federal-standards/)
that programs penalize lower wage workers more often, contributing to a
“poor get poorer” cycle of poverty. Wellness programs may also overlook
entire categories of people who have a good reason not to join, such as
people with disabilities. In one case, a woman with a double mastectomy
faced possible fines for [missing
mammograms](http://www.thenewjournalatyale.com/2020/02/worn-down-by-wellness/)
until she provided multiple explanations to her employer’s wellness
program.

Experts question the effectiveness of workplace wellness programs, since
evidence shows little impact to key outcomes. Two [randomized
studies](https://www.kff.org/private-insurance/issue-brief/trends-in-workplace-wellness-programs-and-evolving-federal-standards/)
followed participants for 12+ months and found no improvement to medical
spending or health outcomes. Wellness programs do not require physician
oversight, so the interventions may not be supported by scientific
evidence. For example, Body Mass Index (BMI) has fallen out of favor in
the medical community but persists in wellness programs.

![](image_2.jpg)

Wellness programs may focus on reducing sedentary time or tracking
steps.

Before joining an employee wellness program, do your homework to
understand more about the potential downsides. Remember that certain
activities are safer than others: are you disclosing lab results or
simply attending a lecture on healthy eating? If you are asked to share
information, get answers first: What data will be collected? Which
companies can see it? Can it be used to make employment decisions?
Lastly, understand that these programs may not be effective and cannot
replace the advice of a trained physician.

References

-   [*https://www.consumerreports.org/health-privacy/are-workplace-wellness-programs-a-privacy-problem/*](https://www.consumerreports.org/health-privacy/are-workplace-wellness-programs-a-privacy-problem/)

-   [*https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323538785\_Health\_and\_Big\_Data\_An\_Ethical\_Framework\_for\_Health\_Information\_Collection\_by\_Corporate\_Wellness\_Programs*](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323538785_Health_and_Big_Data_An_Ethical_Framework_for_Health_Information_Collection_by_Corporate_Wellness_Programs)

-   [*https://www.kff.org/private-insurance/issue-brief/trends-in-workplace-wellness-programs-and-evolving-federal-standards/*](https://www.kff.org/private-insurance/issue-brief/trends-in-workplace-wellness-programs-and-evolving-federal-standards/)

-   *<https://hbr.org/2017/01/workplace-wellness-programs-could-be-putting-your-health-data-at-risk>*

-   [*https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/workplace-wellness/index.html*](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/workplace-wellness/index.html)

-   [*https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/laws-regulations/index.html*](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/laws-regulations/index.html)

-   [*https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/security/index.html*](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/security/index.html)

-   [*https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/breach-notification/breach-reporting/index.html*](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/breach-notification/breach-reporting/index.html)

-   [*https://i.pinimg.com/originals/24/43/ba/2443ba5aaac0fface135795ca08d3c76.jpg*](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/24/43/ba/2443ba5aaac0fface135795ca08d3c76.jpg)
